---
# vim: ts=4 sw=4 expandtab syn=off tw=72 :
layout: post
title: 'RTFM, you geek!'
keywords: 'perl, mobundle, fatpack, fatpacking'
image:
   feature: tramonto.jpg
   credit: Tramonto in Australia
   creditlink: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Australia
comments: false
---

After the previous post, I shipped the script and the related libraries
to the recipient and slept as a baby. Just to discover that they didn't
figure out how to use it properly!

The main issue is that geeks and technical people generally don't read
the documentation. I admit, most of the times I don't do this as well.
In this case, my good colleague saw a Perl script, made the
too-simple-to-seem-true association between Perl and the Web and
installed Apache! Well, as a matter of fact <em>it is</em> a web
application, but I strived to make it self-contained and you end up with
Apache?!?

Luck was that I was there some thirty minutes after to correct the
problem and let Perl shine: "hey bro, it's a single program with an
embedded web server!". That was the lucky part, anyway: the environment
we're working into is *particularly* hostile, to the point that
two machines in the very same network can't ping one another!
Fortunately when I did use the program to make some tests the network
connectivity was not that bad and we managed to do them.

Another thing that annoyed me a bit was that the script was not
*fully* self-contained. Yes, I have to ship a hole tar.gz file...
so I thought that it would be great to distribute a single script
without anything more. One option is PAR, of course, but I always
regretted to use it because you basically have to compile for a target
architecture (at least in my understanding). In case of Pure-Perl stuff
this does not make me happy.

Some time ago I had a similar problem that I solved with a script to
bundle Pure-Perl modules inside a script. I put it in
[repository](http://repo.or.cz/w/mobundle.git) in
[repo.org.cz](http://repo.or.cz/), for anyone to have a good laugh.
