---
# vim: ts=4 sw=4 expandtab syn=off
layout: post
title: TeePee
image:
   feature: teepee.jpg
   credit: Ralph Irving Gifford and H.H. Tammen (at US Library of Congress)
   creditlink: '#fn:credits'
comments: true
---

Get the most out of your APIs... from the shell!

I sometimes need to read values from a configuration file or a response
to an API call from the shell. Most of the times they come either in
JSON or YAML format... which is when `teepee` comes handy.

Why the name, in the first place? It heavily relies upon the Perl
distribution/module
[Template::Perlish](https://metacpan.org/pod/Template::Perlish), whose
initials are *Ti Pi*. Hence... `teepee`.[^credits]

## Table of Contents

- TOC
{:toc}

## Quick! Show Me Something! {#quick}

{% highlight bash %}
# something about me
metacpan='http://api.metacpan.org/v0'
curl "$metacpan/author/POLETTIX" \
  | teepee -nT "Hi! I'm [% name %] <[% email.0 %]>."
# Hi! I'm Flavio Poletti <polet...pan.org>.

# for extracting multiple data, let's cache in a variable
me=$(curl "$metacpan/author/POLETTIX")
teepee -I "$me" -nT 'See my big face at [% gravatar_url %]?s=200'
# See my big face at http://www.gravatar.com/av...b57.png?s=200

# my favourite band
mbrz='http://musicbrainz.org/ws/2'
pjq=$(curl "$mbrz/artist?fmt=json&limit=1&query=Pearl%20Jam")
name=$(teepee -I "$pjq" -v artists.0.name)
country=$(teepee -I "$pjq" -v artists.0.country)
echo "$name rock from the $country"'!'
# Pearl Jam rock from the US!

# let's just isolate data about Pearl Jam from the query response
pj=$(teepee -I "$pjq" -F'YAML(V "artists.0")')
year=$(teepee -I "$pj" -v "'life-span'.begin")
city=$(teepee -I "$pj" -v "'begin-area'.name")
echo "they started from $city in $year"
# they started from Seattle in 1990

# we can also pretty-print, especially handy with compact JSON
ap='http://www.astro-phys.com/api/de406'
curl "$ap/coefficients?date=1972-11-9&bodies=mars"
# {"date": 2441630.5, "type": "chebyshev", "results": {"mars": ...
curl "$ap/coefficients?date=1972-11-9&bodies=mars" \
    | teepee -FYAML
# ---
# date: 2441630.5
# results:
#   mars:
#     coefficients:
#       -
#         - -221246363.667206
#         - 26761105.8067001
#         ...
#     end: 2441680.5
#     start: 2441616.5
# type: chebyshev
# unit: km

# or do the pretty-printing of a sub-section only
teepee -I "$pj" -F'YAML(V "aliases")'
# ---
# -
#   begin-date: ~
#   end-date: ~
#   locale: ~
#   name: 'Mookie Blaylock'
#   primary: ~
#   sort-name: 'Mookie Blaylock' type: ~

{% endhighlight %}

*No, I didn't know Pearl Jam had an alias as Mookie Blaylock!*

## Setting Up

To get up to speed in the examples, you need `teepee` and
[curl](http://curl.haxx.se/).

`teepee` is easy to install, especially in the [bundled
version](https://github.com/polettix/teepee/raw/master/bundle/teepee):

{% highlight bash %}
$ curl -LO \
    https://github.com/polettix/teepee/raw/master/bundle/teepee
$ chmod +x teepee
{% endhighlight %}

We will assume the directory where you place `teepee` is in the `PATH`,
otherwise you can move it in some directory that is. (e.g.
`usr/local/bin`). You shouldn't need anything more than Perl 5.8 to be
able to run it (please report any issues!).

In case you don't have `curl`, you can try to see if you have [GNU
Wget](https://www.gnu.org/software/wget/) instead. In this case, a quick
and dirty replacement for the examples below can be the following
`alias`:

{% highlight bash %}
alias curl='wget -O -'
{% endhighlight %}

Last, but not least, we will use `bash` as our shell of election in the
following examples. You are smart enough to figure out what to change in
case you want to use something different!

## Getting A Value

The basic *use case* is probably just getting a value from a JSON or
YAML structured file. You will need:

- some *input* structured data
- the *path* of the variable in the data

To make things clearer, let's start playing with the following sample
input data:

    ---
    name: Flavio
    surname: Poletti
    cpan:
        id: POLETTIX
        metacpan: https://metacpan.org/author/POLETTIX
        latest:
            - Data::Crumbr
            - Template::Perlish
            - Graphics::Potrace
            - Log::Log4perl::Tiny
        favorites:
            Dancer: YANICK
            JSON: MAKAMAKA
            Moo: HAARG

We'll assume the above text is in file `input.yaml`, so we have our
*input*.

What's a *path* then? It's how you can reach the value you're interested
into starting from the root of the data structure, all the way down,
with components separated by dots. For example, who's the current
maintainer of `Moo`?

{% highlight bash %}
$ teepee -i input.yaml -v cpan.favorites.Moo
HAARG$ # OK but next prompt is on the same line and it's UGLY...
{% endhighlight %}

The first two options we just saw are:

`-i`
: is for inputs. They can be JSON or YAML, and `teepee` will try to
  auto-detect. You can be explicit and use `-j` and `-y`, you can guess
  what for what;

`-v`
: is for variable's path. As anticipated, the different
  keys/indexes, separated by dots (more on this later!).

Well, we managed to get the value we were after, but it would be nice to
have a newline when printing out to the terminal. No worries, there's
option `-n` to the rescue:

{% highlight bash %}
$ teepee -i input.yaml -nv cpan.favorites.Dancer
YANICK
$ # now the next prompt is on its own new line!
{% endhighlight %}

This option is useful only for printing things to the terminal,
otherwise you can ignore it, e.g. when just filling up some variables:

{% highlight bash %}
$ metacpan_uri=$(teepee -i input.yaml -v cpan.metacpan)
$ echo "$metacpan_uri"
https://metacpan.org/author/POLETTIX
{% endhighlight %}

So far so good, but probably not that impressive as we could have
obtained the same with some `grep` and `sed` magic. In this case
probably yes, but what if data were shaped like this instead:

    ---
    name: Flavio
    surname: Poletti
    cpan:
        id: POLETTIX
        metacpan: https://metacpan.org/author/POLETTIX
        latest:
            - Data::Crumbr
            - Template::Perlish
            - Graphics::Potrace
            - Log::Log4perl::Tiny
        using:
            JSON:
                id: 'https://metacpan.org/release/JSON'
        favorites:
            Dancer:
                id: YANICK
            JSON:
                id: MAKAMAKA
            Moo:
                id: HAARG

Note that I added a `using` hash that has itself a `JSON` element inside,
and changed how `id`s are associated to the distributions. To make
things funnier, the shape of `using` and of `favorites` is the same, but
with different data. Well, *now* it's a bit more difficult to get the
*right* id for the JSON inside `favorites`, isn't it? It's a trivial
change in calling `teepee` though:

{% highlight bash %}
# --------------------------------------------vvv
$ teepee -i input2.yaml -nv cpan.favorites.JSON.id
MAKAMAKA
{% endhighlight %}

I hope you appreciate the simplification.

In case you're wondering, accessing arrays just means using the right
index in the right place:

{% highlight bash %}
$ teepee -i input.yaml -nv cpan.latest.1
Template::Perlish
{% endhighlight %}

The assumption (at least so far) is that you know exactly how your data
are shaped, including the position of elements inside arrays. We will
see later in section [Iterating Over an Array](#array) that there are
functions that allow us to iterate over data structures, so that we can
partially[^partially] remove this assumption.

[^partially]: You are still supposed to know how your data are *shaped*,
    although you might not know where the different elements in an array
    are placed.

## Using Available Inputs

If you're consuming an API, chances are you're actually doing remote
calls (e.g. with `curl`) and getting responses back.

You are polite enough to understand that if you need three values from
the same response... you don't have to make three different calls,
right? One alternative (apart using temporary files, of course) is to
save the response in a shell variable, which works for local files a
well of course:

{% highlight bash %}
# cache query result in a variable, for using over and over
$ mcpan_input=$(curl "http://api.metacpan.org/v0/author/POLETTIX")

# read file contents in a convenience variable
$ local_input=$(< input.yaml)
{% endhighlight %}

In this case, you can use the *immediate* parameters, that are the
uppercase counterparts of the file-base input parameters:

{% highlight bash %}
# auto-detect
$ PAUSE_ID=$(teepee -I "$local_input" -v cpan.id)

# force interpreting as YAML
$ name=$(teepee -Y "$local_input" -v name)

# force interpreting as JSON
$ fullname=$(teepee -J "$mcpan_input" -v name)
{% endhighlight %}

Remember to put double quotes around the variable with the data, or the
shell will make a mess!

## Expanding Templates

Getting variables is handy, but what if you want to generate something a
bit more evolved? You can use
[Template::Perlish](https://metacpan.org/pod/Template::Perlish) for
this, e.g. with a template passed directly on the command line as text
with option `-T`:

{% highlight bash %}
$ teepee -i input.yaml -nT 'Hello, I am [% name%] [% surname %]'
Hello, I am Flavio Poletti
{% endhighlight %}

Templates can live in files, of course. Again, what's immediate on the
command line as an uppercase option `-T` becomes a lowercase option `-t`
when taken from a file:

{% highlight bash %}
$ cat story.txt
Hello, my name is [% name %] [% surname %].
Lorem ipsum...

$ teepee -i input.yaml -t story.txt
Hello, my name is Flavio Poletti.
Lorem ipsum...

{% endhighlight %}

This can come quite handy when you're doing API consumption where you
have to send JSON text back and forth. For example, one way to see one's
favorite distributions on *meta::cpan* is to POST the following query:

    {
        "fields": [ "distribution" ],
        "filter" : { "term" : { "user" : "[% user %]" } },
        "size": 100
    }

We will store the above template in `favorites-for.json`.

We need the user identifier, which is easy to retrieve from the author's
profile:

{% highlight bash %}
$ me=$(curl "http://api.metacpan.org/v0/author/POLETTIX")
$ teepee -I "$me" -nv user
NwdPuW9vRBGuIdSr4Gw26g
$ query=$(teepee -I "$me" -t favorites-for.json)
$ echo "$query"
{
    "fields": [ "distribution" ],
    "filter" : { "term" : { "user" : "NwdPuW9vRBGuIdSr4Gw26g" } },
    "size": 100
}
$ favs=$(curl -XPOST "http://api.metacpan.org/v0/favorite/_search" \
              -d "$query")
$ teepee -I "$favs" -nT 'I have [% hits.total %] favorites'
I have 13 favorites
{% endhighlight %}

As you are correctly thinking now, this requires that the template is
shaped to accept exactly the data structure coming from the response,
which is a bit stiff. We'll see later how to use even more general
inputs.

## Iterating Over an Array {#array}

Our last query result contained as much as 13 favorites, in an array
shaped like this:

    {
        "hits" : {
            "hits" : [
                {
                    "fields" : {
                        "distribution" : "Template-Toolkit"
                    },
                    "_score" : 1,
                    "_type" : "favorite",
                    "_id" : "vx77xt7X5e_a1pr66pq_QJvhbJs",
                    "_index" : "cpan_v1"
                },
                {
                    "_index" : "cpan_v1",
                    "_id" : "DD1K8tb8s2oNX8RN1UZEL6wijUQ",
                    "fields" : {
                        "distribution" : "Pod-Markdown"
                    },
                    "_type" : "favorite",
                    "_score" : 1
                },
                ...


How to get a list of distribution names? We might `grep`, of course, or
use a bit of Perl with
[Template::Perlish](https://metacpan.org/pod/Template::Perlish):

{% highlight bash %}
$ teepee -I "$favs" -T 'My favorites:
[% for my $hit (A "hits.hits") {
   %]- [%= $hit->{fields}{distribution} %]
[% } %]'
My favorites:
- Template-Toolkit
- Pod-Markdown
- GraphViz
- Pinto
- Parse-RecDescent
- Path-Class
- Dancer
- JSON
- WWW-Mechanize
- Dist-Zilla
- WWW-Mechanize-Shell
- libwww-perl
- Moo
{% endhighlight %}

We already saw that option `-T` allows us to set a generic template.
What's good is that the template can also contain Perl code.

The really handy thing here is the `A` function, that works on a *path*
(string `"hits.hits"` in this case) and, assuming it leads to an array
reference, expands the reference to a list of items. In our case, each
item is a hash where the interesting part is inside `fields`, then
inside `distribution`.

## Handy Shortcuts

We saw in [Iterating Over an Array](#array) that it's possible to use a
function `A` in the templates, that takes a template path and expands
it into a list. There are a few of additional functions:

- `V` expands to a single value. It might be a leaf scalar or an
  intermediate data structure, you should know what you have though;
- `H` expands a hash reference to the list intermixing keys and values;
- `HK` expands a hash reference into the list if its keys;
- `HV` expands a hash reference into the list of its values.

They all take a *path*, either as a string or as a reference to an array
containing the different crumbs in the sequence.

The functions also accept an optional second parameter, assumed to be a
reference to a data structure. When present, it is visited instead of
the top-level data structure. Hence, the last example in the previous
section can be rewritten as follows:

{% highlight bash %}
$ teepee -I "$favs" -T 'My favorites:
[%
    for my $hit (A "hits.hits") { %]- [%=
        V("fields.distribution", $hit) %]
[% } %]'
My favorites:
- Template-Toolkit
...
{% endhighlight %}


## Yet Another Input Channel

There is an interesting [meta::cpan](https://metacpan.org/) query
[get the latest version numbers of your favorite
modules](https://github.com/CPAN-API/cpan-api/blob/master/docs/API-docs.md#get-the-latest-version-numbers-of-your-favorite-modules)
that can be expressed in the following template:

    {
        "query" : { "terms" :
            { "release.distribution" : [% list_array %] } },
        "filter" : { "term" : { "release.status" : "latest" } },
        "fields" : [ "distribution", "version" ],
        "size"   : [% size %]
    }

We'll save the above template in `lastv-favs.json`.

Now, of course, the issue is to get `list_array` and `size` for *your*
favorites. In the previous section we already saw mine, so we can
generate something suitable for `list_array` as follows:

{% highlight bash %}
$ list_array=$(teepee -I "$favs" -T '[ [%=
    join ", ", map { qq["$_->{fields}{distribution}"]}
        A "hits.hits";
%] ]')
$ size=$(teepee -I "$favs" -v hits.total)
{% endhighlight %}

Now we have our expansion values inside shell variables... how do we
pass them to `teepee` for expanding the template above? This is where
option `-d` comes handy, because it allows you to define variable
valued directly on the command line:

{% highlight bash %}
$ query=$(teepee -t "lastv-favs.json" \
    -d list_array="$list_array" \
    -d size="$size")
{% endhighlight %}

But wait! Why does it seem to be stuck at this point? The fact is that
by default `teepee` expects to read some input, and it goes to standard
input by default. If you don't want it to get any *regular* input (as
in this case, in which you define variables directly) you can use option
`-N`:

{% highlight bash %}
$ query=$(teepee -Nt "lastv-favs.json" \
    -d list_array="$list_array" \
    -d size="$size")
$ echo "$query"
{
    "query" : { "terms" :
        { "release.distribution" : [ "Template-Toolkit", ... ] } },
    "filter" : { "term" : { "release.status" : "latest" } },
    "fields" : [ "distribution", "version" ],
    "size"   : 13
}
{% endhighlight %}

We're now ready to run our query:

{% highlight bash %}
$ lfv=$(curl -XPOST "http://api.metacpan.org/v0/release/_search" \
             -d "$query")
$ teepee -I "$lfv" -T 'My favorites with latest version:
[%
    for my $hit (A "hits.hits") {
        my $f = $hit->{fields};
        print "- $f->{distribution} ($f->{version})\n";
    }
%]'
My favorites with latest version:
- Path-Class (0.35)
- Pod-Markdown (3.003)
- GraphViz (2.19)
- WWW-Mechanize-Shell (0.55)
- Parse-RecDescent (1.967013)
- Moo (2.000002)
- WWW-Mechanize (1.75)
- JSON (2.90)
- libwww-perl (6.15)
- Template-Toolkit (2.26)
- Pinto (0.11)
- Dist-Zilla (5.042)
- Dancer (1.3202)
{% endhighlight %}


## Reshaping

In our last example, we extracted information from the first query into
two variables, then used them to build up a new template for our next
query. This surely works, but might become cumbersome (and intensive in
terms of process-calling) if you want to take more than a handful of
values.

If you're going to use `teepee` on the data, like in our example, an
efficient alternative is to build up a new JSON/YAML data structure out
of your input data:

{% highlight bash %}
$ reshaped=$(teepee -I "$favs" -NT '---
size: [% hits.total %]
distros:
[% for my $hit (A "hits.hits") { %]   - "[%=
        $hit->{fields}{distribution} %]"
[% } %]')
$ echo "$reshaped"
---
size: 13
distros:
   - "Template-Toolkit"
   - "Pod-Markdown"
   - "GraphViz"
   - "Pinto"
   - "Parse-RecDescent"
   - "Path-Class"
   - "Dancer"
   - "JSON"
   - "WWW-Mechanize"
   - "Dist-Zilla"
   - "WWW-Mechanize-Shell"
   - "libwww-perl"
   - "Moo"
{% endhighlight %}

We will have to modify our template at this point, but it's also cleaner
to expect an array as input and handle the shaping in the template
itself. Here's our second take at the template (we will call the file
`lastv-favs-2.json`):

    {
        "query" : {
            "terms" : {
                "release.distribution" : [ [%
                    print join ", ", map { qq{"$_"} } A 'distros';
                %] ]
            }
        },
        "filter" : { "term" : { "release.status" : "latest" } },
        "fields" : [ "distribution", "version" ],
        "size"   : [% size %]
    }

The query then becomes:

{% highlight bash %}
$ query=$(teepee -t "lastv-favs-2.json" -Y"$reshaped")
{% endhighlight %}

with similar results as before.

This reshaping does not necessarily have to be applied for generating
new YAML or JSON though. If you're still interested into getting values
into shell variables, you can prepare the right text and then `eval` it,
to get all values in one shot:

{% highlight bash %}
$ variables=$(teepee -I "$favs" -T 'list_array=[%=
    my $list = join ", ", map { qq["$_->{fields}{distribution}"]}
        A "hits.hits";
    quotemeta("[ $list ]");
%]
size=[%= quotemeta(V "hits.total" ) %]
')
$ eval "$variables"
$ echo "size: $size - array: $list_array"
size: 13 - array: [ "Template-Toolkit", "Pod-Markdown", ...
{% endhighlight %}

> **Don't use `eval` unless you're 200% sure about what you are
> doing!** To be on the safe side, either avoid this technique
> completely, or use it only on data you trust.

## Pretty-Printing and Isolating

Some APIs choose to return pretty-printed data, trading some space for
ease of use. Other ones go for compactness, and leave you the *burden*
to pretty print the response if you need to read it (as a human).

`teepee` allows you to re-print your input data either in JSON or YAML
format. This also comes handy if you want to trasform from one to the
other, by the way; so you might have data that is already
pretty-printed, and re-pretty-print it into another format (I usually
find YAML a better reading experience).

Pretty-printing is done through a couple of functions that are available
in the templates; unsurprisingly, these functions are called `YAML` and
`JSON`. This is how it would be done:

{% highlight bash %}
$ ap='http://www.astro-phys.com/api/de406'
$ mars=$(curl "$ap/coefficients?date=1972-11-9&bodies=mars")
$ echo "$mars"
{"date": 2441630.5, "type": "chebyshev", "results": {"mars": ...

$ teepee -J "$mars" -T '[%= YAML %]'
---
date: 2441630.5
results:
  mars:
    coefficients:
      -
        - -221246363.667206
        - 26761105.8067001
        ...
      -
        - -80259893.9503651
        - -50770737.7568579
        ...
    end: 2441680.5
    start: 2441616.5
type: chebyshev
unit: km
{% endhighlight %}

`JSON` would work similarly. This construct is so handy that it made
sense to provide a slightly shorter way to type it. In particular,
option `-F` provides a way to specify a template without too much
boilerplate, so the following two calls are actually equivalent:

{% highlight bash %}
$ teepee -Fwhatever ...
# ...
$ teepee -T '[%= whatever %]'
{% endhighlight %}

Hence, pretty-printing in YAML is as simple as this:

{% highlight bash %}
$ teepee -FYAML -J "$mars"
---
date: 2441630.5
results:
...
{% endhighlight %}

The two functions can also take an optional parameter, namely a
reference to a data structure. Guess what? They will pretty-print that!
So, if we are interested only in the `results.mars.coefficients` we can
isolate them as follows:

{% highlight bash %}
$ coeffs=$(teepee -F'YAML V "results.mars.coefficients"' -J"$mars")
$ echo "$coeffs"
---
-
  - -221246363.667206
  - 26761105.8067001
  - 4016544.02022364
...
{% endhighlight %}

This can be useful if you're only interested into a subsection of a
complex response, because you can isolate that subsection into a shell
variable (like `$coeffs` in our example above) and then run `teepee`
over that variable with shorter paths.


## A Few Examples

Here are a few examples of consuming APIs from the shell with the help
of `teepee`... I hope they will inspire you!

### What's the Weather Like?

[OpenWeatherMap](http://openweathermap.org/) *delivers 1 billion*
[weather] *forecasts per day*. It should be able to cope with a few
requests from us!

To use it, you will need to register (freely) at [the registration
page](http://home.openweathermap.org/users/sign_up) and get an API key.

> Yes, I know that the examples in the [Current Weather
  Data](http://openweathermap.org/current) page work fine and include a
  valid API key, but you SHOULD get your own key to be fair!

Every API call is a `GET` and parameters are passed in the URI, encoded.
One of them is the API key, so we'll start with the following
definition:

{% highlight bash %}
$ key=YOUR-API-KEY-HERE
{% endhighlight %}

Accessing the latest weather data is as simple as sending a query to
`http://api.openweathermap.org/data/2.5/weather?appid=$key`. Response
parameters are explained [here](http://openweathermap.org/current). We
will format a little report according to the following template (saved
as `weather.tmpl`):

    [%
        # convenience function for cutting excess decimals
        sub fmt { return sprintf '%.1lf', shift; }
    %]Hi! Here's some facts about [% name %] [[% sys.country %]]:
      - position is about latitude [% coord.lat %]N and longitude [%
          coord.lon %]E
      - [% weather.0.main %]: [% weather.0.description %]
      - temperature is [%= fmt(V('main.temp') - 273.15) %]°C ([%=
          fmt(V('main.temp_min') - V('main.temp')) %]/+[%=
          fmt(V('main.temp_max') - V('main.temp')) %]°C)
      - humidity is [% main.humidity %]%
      - last sunrise was on [%= scalar localtime V('sys.sunrise') %]
      - last sunset  was on [%= scalar localtime V('sys.sunset') %]

Now, we're ready to get some facts about Roma, my city:

{% highlight bash %}
$ owm_weather_api="http://api.openweathermap.org/data/2.5/weather"
$ curl "$owm_weather_api?appid=$key&q=Roma,it" \
    | teepee -t weather.tmpl
Hi! Here are some facts about Roma [IT]:
  - position is about latitude 41.89N and longitude 12.48E
  - Clear: Sky is Clear
  - temperature is 8.1°C (-2.1/+0.9°C)
  - humidity is 87%
  - last sunrise was on Tue Dec 15 07:31:04 2015
  - last sunset  was on Tue Dec 15 16:39:56 2015
{% endhighlight %}

Not exactly hot... but lovely for this time of the year in the night,
isn't it? Let's look how it will go in the coming days, using
`forecast-daily.tmpl`:

    [%
        sub fmt { sprintf '%.1lf', shift }
    %]Forecast for [% city.name %] [[% city.country %]] ([%
            city.coord.lat %]N, [% city.coord.lon %]E):[%
        for my $day (A 'list') {
    %]
    - [%= (my $d = scalar localtime $day->{dt}) =~ s{\d\d:.*}{}mxs;
        $d; %]: [%=
            fmt $day->{temp}{min} %]°C/[%= fmt $day->{temp}{max} %]°C [%=
            $day->{weather}[0]{main} %] ([%=
            $day->{weather}[0]{description} %])[%
        }
    %]

and the following query:

{% highlight bash %}
$ owm_fd="http://api.openweathermap.org/data/2.5/forecast/daily"
$ curl "$owm_fd?appid=$key&q=Roma,it&units=metric&cnt=16" \
    | teepee -t forecast-daily.tmpl
Forecast for Roma [IT] (41.894741N, 12.4839E):
  - Tue Dec 15 : 7.3°C/7.8°C Clear (sky is clear)
  - Wed Dec 16 : 5.8°C/12.6°C Clouds (few clouds)
  - Thu Dec 17 : 4.2°C/11.4°C Clear (sky is clear)
  - Fri Dec 18 : 8.4°C/13.3°C Rain (light rain)
  - Sat Dec 19 : 9.9°C/11.5°C Rain (moderate rain)
  - Sun Dec 20 : 6.2°C/12.1°C Clear (sky is clear)
  - Mon Dec 21 : 7.0°C/13.4°C Rain (light rain)
  - Tue Dec 22 : 10.0°C/13.2°C Rain (light rain)
  - Wed Dec 23 : 13.5°C/15.2°C Rain (light rain)
  - Thu Dec 24 : 9.2°C/15.4°C Clear (sky is clear)
  - Fri Dec 25 : 7.9°C/14.5°C Clear (sky is clear)
  - Sat Dec 26 : 10.9°C/14.7°C Rain (light rain)
  - Sun Dec 27 : 9.2°C/14.2°C Rain (light rain)
  - Mon Dec 28 : 7.2°C/13.6°C Rain (light rain)
  - Tue Dec 29 : 10.0°C/13.4°C Rain (light rain)
  - Wed Dec 30 : 10.6°C/14.4°C Rain (light rain)

{% endhighlight %}

A little too rainy for my taste... but it's life!


### Where Can I Go From...

[Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/) is the biggest online
encyclopedia, and can be a real time drag as you go through the pages,
following links over links (even only internal).

For example... how many links are contained in a few pages, e.g. about
`Perl`, `Bash` or `Pearl Jam`? Let's see:

{% highlight bash %}
$ wp='https://en.wikipedia.org/w/api.php'
$ wpq="$wp?action=query&prop=links&format=json&pllimit=500"
$ for title in 'Perl' 'Bash' 'Pearl_Jam' ; do
    curl -s "$wpq&titles=$title" \
        | teepee -nT '[%=
            my ($d) = HV "query.pages";
            my $n = scalar @{$d->{links}};
            "$d->{title}: $n";
          %]'
  done
Perl: 450
Bash: 14
Pearl Jam: 455
{% endhighlight %}

Well... it seems that there is a *slight* better chance to get lost
reading about Pearl Jam than about Perl, but they're almost there
together!

### What's the Last xkcd Strip?

I hope you love [xkcd](http://xkcd.com/) as much as I do. You're in the
terminal and you would like to know what's the last strip, just to see
if there's anything new...

{% highlight bash %}
$ curl http://xkcd.com/info.0.json \
    | teepee -n \
        -T '#[%num%] "[%safe_title%]", [%year%]-[%month%]-[%day%]'
#1616 "Lunch", 2015-12-14
{% endhighlight %}

When you call it you don't get too much data, e.g.:

{% highlight bash %}
$ xkcd_last=$(curl http://xkcd.com/info.0.json)
$ echo "$xkcd_last"
{"month": "12", "num": 1616, "link": "", "year": "2015", "news": "", "safe_title": "Lunch", "transcript": "", "alt": "I'm trying to be healthier, so after I eat this brick of cheese, I'll have a spoonful of grease-soaked vegetables.", "img": "http:\/\/imgs.xkcd.com\/comics\/lunch.png", "title": "Lunch", "day": "14"}
{% endhighlight %}

Well... it's not that readable, is it? All that scrolling to the
right... This can use some pretty printing, e.g. in YAML:

{% highlight bash %}
$ teepee -J "$xkcd_last" -FYAML
---
alt: "I'm trying to be healthier, so after I eat this brick of cheese, I'll have a spoonful of grease-soaked vegetables."
day: '14'
img: http://imgs.xkcd.com/comics/lunch.png
link: ''
month: '12'
news: ''
num: 1616
safe_title: Lunch
title: Lunch
transcript: ''
year: '2015'
{% endhighlight %}


### ... And So On...

I hope you got your feet wet at this point. Be sure to go (again)
through the examples in section [Quick! Show Me Something!](#quick),
they can be a bit more understandable at this point!

## Time's Up!

If you made it to the end of this article... congratulations! I hope you
will consider `teepee` as a tool worth using in your next shell project.

If you want to play a bit, a good entry point for finding out APIs to do
some testing is [Programmable Web](http://www.programmableweb.com/),
although for Perl enthusiast also [meta::cpan](https://metacpan.org/) is
worth a look. Some good starting points that do not require registration
are the following:

- [meta::cpan](http://metacpan.org/) is a fast growing (feature-wise)
  search tool for CPAN. [meta::cpan
  APIs](https://github.com/CPAN-API/cpan-api/blob/master/docs/API-docs.md)
  ([entry point](http://api.metacpan.org/)) allow programmale access to
  the database.

- [MusicBrainz](http://musicbrainz.org/) is an open music encyclopedia
  that collects music metadata and makes it available to the public.
  [Development](http://musicbrainz.org/doc/Development) explains how to
  consume their APIs, with details on the [JSON
  interface](http://musicbrainz.org/doc/Development/JSON_Web_Service).
  ([Entry point](http://musicbrainz.org/ws/2/)).

- [Star API](http://hacktheuniverse.github.io/star-api/) *provides access
  the Digital Universe Data set*. ([Entry
  point](http://star-api.herokuapp.com/api/v1/stars)).

- [OpenWeatherMap](http://openweathermap.org/) *delivers 1 billion
  forecasts per day*. API description is
  [here](http://openweathermap.org/api). Well, you're supposed to
  register actually, as already written before...

- [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org) is a wonderful resource for
  information... although you always have to remember that it's not
  fully peer-reviewed. It has an [API
  Tutorial](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/API:Tutorial).

- [xkcd](http://xkcd.com) is *A webcomic of romance, sarcasm, math, and
  language*. Very funny. API hints [here](https://xkcd.com/json.html).

There are many more... including your very own API for the next-decade
killer application!

[^credits]:
    Photo credits: [Teepees on the
    Columbia](http://www.loc.gov/pictures/item/95522788/)
    by Ralph Irving Gifford, [Ute
    Pagre](http://www.loc.gov/pictures/item/95500540/) by H.H. Tammen.

